today we're taking a closer look at a
part of the country suffering a one-two
punch in the middle of this pandemic
America's oil fields we've reported on
the historic drop in crude oil prices at
one point the price fell to a shocking
negative 37 dollars a barrel but beyond
the numbers the collapse in oil has had
devastating consequences for so many
people whose livelihoods are now in
jeopardy
ABC's Marcus Moore brings us this story
of the hard-hit area trying to cope with
the fallout by the time the Sun rises
over West Texas many of the pump jacks
that dot the bare terrain have already
been working overnight and what they
bring from deep below the surface has
made dreams possible
it has made lots of dreams come true
certainly made certainly made mine come
true but today for so many their dreams
are on hold nobody that I knew who saw
this coming the price of oil right now I
mean it's it's killing us it's
absolutely killing
hello can you forecast I can hang on
I mean that's the unknown tonight the
story of a perfect storm and
unprecedented collapse in the price of
oil mixed with a pandemic that's claimed
lives and gutted the global demand for
crude putting livelihoods in jeopardy
amidst an uncertain future now you're
looking at millions of dollars worth of
equipment just sitting here in millions
and millions of dollars worth of paper
weights obviously not making any money
if it's sitting here Jesse Lane is the
chief operator of nimble crane in Pecos
Texas one of the many service companies
that support the oil and gas industry
however their work has dropped off
dramatically planes aren't flying cruise
ships aren't sailing buses aren't moving
Lane says there were signs of trouble
long before the pandemic head an
international price war driving the
global supply of oil up and prices down
a situation only worsened by the sudden
fall and demand Lane says a simple Drive
makes it all clear just a couple of
months ago there was near gridlock from
trucks heading to drilling sites passing
through this 4-way stop in Orla Texas
this is Orla Texas today that same
intersection virtually empty it is
perhaps the most vivid illustration of
how this economic slowdown has impacted
this community and so many others across
West Texas when you look at it sitting
here and you get knocked back two years
it's depressing just like a switch it
all changed he's had to layoff dozens of
workers to have to tell someone one of
your employees that they're no longer
working I know that must be must be the
hardest thing you've ever had to do
when you
the guys that work here they they know
when it's busy they know when it's slow
so when you call somebody into your
office when it's slow you know they know
that's probably what's happening and
when you have to tell them that they
have to go home with no job it's very
very tough very very tough toughest
thing I do we have no choice but things
to go up Mike Bowman is a crane operator
he's one of the few still employed he
travels back and forth between West
Texas and Alabama staying in a small
camper on company property
today he's packing to head back home
knowing full well the possibility you
might not get called back if these get
worse at any point you know the owners
could show up and say hey look you know
we just can't afford to do this anyway
and I understand that
I mean trying to run a business you're
trying to make money you're not trying
to lose money you've got you know
$100,000 invest but each one of these
things Park that is an eventuality Bob
Stewart vows to avoid welding company in
Andrews Texas
my granddad started this business and
seventy seven years ago he and his wife
Deniz bought the company from his
grandfather in 1997 yeah they've
weathered ups and downs before but this
one is admittedly different the stunning
fall in April the price of a barrel of
oil dipped to negative 37 dollars but I
saw it go negative I I told Denise that
night I said we're not gonna have a job
tomorrow not war albeit slightly prices
have edged back up I never thought I'd
be happy to say to to her all but Stuart
grapples with the pressing questions
about how he will ensure his business
survives how to keep workers here
employed well into the future that's the
frightening part for me Marcus is the
guy that has to make these decisions for
a hundred and ten people that are
employed here and that I mean if if I
make bad decisions try to guide us
forward if we fail we all fail here
they've all agreed to take pay cuts to
keep the company afloat until things
turn around
some oil and gas workers who just months
ago sat in traffic to reach the oil
fields and now in line at food giveaways
like this one in Odessa
what the oil price is dropping in
coronaviruses just been one or the other
wouldn't be so bad but with both of them
hidden it's destroyed Stacey Collins
told us he hasn't worked in over a month
yeah it's terrible I was to say what has
that been like man
dad like so many across the country the
food bank here expects the lines to
potentially get even longer it's
everything
it runs from somebody who makes $20 an
hour to somebody who makes $200,000 a
year doesn't have a job and that is huge
and until the glut until oil it gets
better we're not going to be any better
we will continue to struggle there is a
burning question here when will it
improve and what will the industry look
like afterwards Stewart who's been
around this industry for decades doesn't
know nor does anyone else we met here in
West Texas how long is this going to
last
$100,000 question isn't it
but in the face of real pain and
uncertainty there is hope in a new day
as the Sun sets once again all these
fields in West Texas I don't know what
it looks like but I'm sure we're all
going to have some scars and some
scrapes and some Nicks and bruises maybe
ten pounds lighter but we're going to
come out we'll figure it out
here we'll have some scars and bruises
no doubt but we will come out Marcus
joins us now Marcus sounds like this are
really hurting because they're so
dependent on the oil industry but even
if things do start to reopen the demand
is unlikely to be there because so many
people are out of work right yeah yeah
that's right Lindsey you know oil and
gas it's the lifeblood of the economy
here in West Texas and then the feeling
from people here is that even when the
the stores and the shops and restaurants
and movie theaters open back up there
are so a lot of people who won't be able
to go to those places because they don't
have jobs and and that's one of the
things that makes this current situation
unique because in downturns in the past
obviously the oil industry has been
through the ups and downs over the
decades but in the past the workers
could perhaps simply go to another state
like the North Dakota or Alaska to do
the same work but right now there simply
are no jobs so they can't go anywhere
and that is what is making this this so
difficult
and Jesse Lane the gentleman who we met
who operates the crane company in
Pickens
you know he said that as people across
the country are celebrating the lower
gas prices he hopes they remember that
there are families that are struggling
because of those low gas prices and they
are hoping that they will have some
relief soon Marcus R thanks so much to
you and the entire team for putting that
piece together for us
hi everyone George Stephanopoulos here
thanks for checking out the ABC News
youtube channel if you'd like to get
more videos show highlights and watch
live event coverage click on the right
over here to subscribe to our Channel
and don't forget to download the ABC
news app for breaking news alerts thanks
for watching